The Lancet
Case ReportRecurrent hyperkalaemia cured by amputation
A 73-year-old woman was referred to us in October, 2000, for investigation of hyperkalaemia. She had a past history of rheumatoid arthritis, mild renal impairment (serum creatinine 120 mmol/L), breast cancer, deep venous thrombosis, and bilateral venous leg ulcers. She had no history of diabetes. On 4 occasions in the preceding 10 months, she had been admitted elsewhere with symptomatic hyperkalaemia and metabolic acidosis. Each time, she was treated with insulin and dextrose and calcium resonium. Although her doctors did not identify a cause, they considered the possibility of adrenal insufficiency, possibly secondary to adrenal metastases. On examination, we found large venous ulcers on both legs, and bilateral ankle oedema (figure). Her only complaint was leg pain. Her pulse was 68/min, regular, and her blood pressure was 138/76 mm Hg without a postural drop. Her jugular venous pressure was not elevated and her mucous membranes appeared moist. Her chest and abdomen were unremarkable and she had no breast masses. She was taking ferrous fumarate, codeine and paracetamol, calcium resonium, lactulose, ascorbic acid and anastrozole. Her urine output was 400–500 mL/24 h. Her ECG was normal. Blood tests showed serum Na+ 134 mmol/L, K+ 7·2 mmol/L, Cl− 114 mmol/L, total CO2 14 mmol/L, urea 16·9 mmol/L, creatinine 114 mmol/L, PO4−1·45 mmol/L and blood glucose 6·5 mmol/L. Creatinine clearance was 32 mL/min, urinary Na+ 1 mmol/L, urinary K+ 23 mmol/L and urine osmolality 436 mOsm/kg. Serum aldosterone was 9800 pmol/L (normal: 36-830) with raised plasma renin 29·6 ng/mL/h (1–6).
Figure. Bilateral venous ulcers
We diagnosed hyperkalaemic metabolic acidosis secondary to volume depletion on the basis of low urinary sodium excretion. However, our patient had no history of gastro-intestinal fluid losses or polyuria, so we were obliged to consider insensible loss of salt and water from her venous ulcers. This loss we confirmed by measuring a 1 kg net gain in bandage weight each time her dressings were changed. We gave her 6 L normal saline intravenously over 3 days, and her hyperkalaemia and renal impairment resolved.
We prescribed sodium chloride and sodium bicarbonate supplements, and discharged the patient from hospital, but she returned with recurrent hyperkalaemia (6·5 mmol/L) and renal impairment (creatinine; 113 mmol/L). Her right leg ulcer looked worse and a biopsy showed squamous cell carcinoma. Surgeons amputated her right leg above the knee. Postoperatively, she had no further problems with volume depletion. When last seen, in April, 2004, she had no intervening episodes of hyperkalaemia and her renal function was normal (creatinine 63 mmol/L).
The kidney is primarily responsible for potassium regulation. Common causes of hyperkalaemia include impaired potassium excretion, hyperglycaemia, and medications such as ACE inhibitors, and potassium-sparing diuretics. Potassium excretion occurs mainly in the cortical collecting duct and is dependent upon adequate sodium and the action of aldosterone.1 Although the possiblity of hypoaldosteronism was considered early in this case, serum aldosterone was high. However, the patient's very low urine sodium concentration is a sign of marked volume depletion.2 Her lack of cardiovascular instability may reflect the chronicity of the hypovolaemia and activation of the renin angiotensin system. Reduced sodium delivery to the cortical collecting duct impairs the secretion of both potassium and hydrogen ions resulting in hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis. This form of volume depletion has a quite different pattern from that caused by vomiting, where the metabolic alkalosis obligates distal sodium delivery with bicarbonate and, in conjunction with high aldosterone levels, results in hypokalaemia. Loss of skin integrity from severe burns or even extensive chronic venous ulceration can result in significant fluid losses. The desert is not the only place where insensible loss causes volume depletion.

