The Lancet
CorrespondenceIntellectual property
Several respondents (Dec 9, p 2015)1, 2, 3 wrote about my piece on intellectual property and clinical research. D Korn and R Meyer1 wonder whether I was engaged in satire. Irony would not be amiss either, given my final sentence (”… the thought experiment I propose…”).
I would emphasise two points.
First, I see little intellectual difference between, say, a genetic assay predictive for a clinical state and a clinical rating (or phenotype) scale that achieves the same purpose. If you admit the argument that you need com-mercialisation to encourage one, you need it for both, or else you risk distorting the research terrain.
Second, the correspondents make points about the importance and value of “unfunded” clinical research. I agree, and in my report, if nothing else, I was trying to defend this activity against those who understand little of how real clinical advance occurs. But commercialisation is, to use a genetic analogy, a dominant negative mutation.
The public sector increasingly uses research funding as a proxy for scientific or clinical value. Indeed scientists frequently seem to avoid talk of making any clinically relevant discovery but rather say how big the next grant is: one is left to draw ones own conclusions.
If you could realise two solutions to a clinical problem, one expensive involving a team of scientists for 5 years, the other based on the insight say of a Barry Marshall or a Sam Shuster (in the examples I quoted) most UK Universities would favour the former, since it looks better in the research assessment exercise, and in turn attracts more funding to the cash-strapped University.


N - 3 PUFAs in cardiovascular disease
At variance with GISSI-Prevenzione results, some recent RCTs did not confirm the beneficial effects of n − 3 PUFAs on fatal CV events. The Japan EPA Lipid Intervention Study (JELIS) [9] was a large-scale trial conducted in more than 18 000 hypercholesterolaemic Japanese patients who were randomised to n − 3 PUFA treatment (1.8 g/day) in combination with statin versus statin alone. After a mean follow-up of 4.6 years, patients treated with n − 3 PUFAs showed a 19% reduction of CHD events.
Many large, randomised clinical trials and some meta-analyses have shown that treatment with n − 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n − 3 PUFAs) is associated with consistent benefits on cardiovascular (CV) events, primarily due to a reduction of coronary and CV deaths in patients with coronary heart disease. At variance with such evidence, some clinical trials and meta-analyses showing a neutral effect of n − 3 PUFAs have been recently published, raising concern about the consistency of the evidence on the CV benefits of n − 3 PUFAs. Several methodological and clinical aspects of these recent trials deserve to be considered. Indeed, the low rate of events or the overoptimistic expectations of the benefit of n − 3 PUFAs used for sample size calculation led to an inadequate statistical power of several studies. The improvement of background medical therapy, serum baseline levels of n − 3 PUFAs, and different doses and/or treatment duration might have downplayed the benefit of n − 3 PUFAs. Similarly to old drugs shown to be effective some years ago, it is possible that the benefits of treatment with n − 3 PUFAs are not as great in a modern CV prevention strategy so rich in many effective drugs compared with past trials testing CV drugs when less effective therapies were available.
Cardiovascular Disease Resulting from a Diet and Lifestyle at Odds with Our Paleolithic Genome: How to Become a 21st-Century Hunter-Gatherer
Monounsaturated fats reduce cardiovascular risk, especially when substituted for easily digestible starches and sugars.37 Nuts are a valuable source of monounsaturated fats and have been shown to be cardioprotective in at least 6 epidemiological studies.15,22,38 Our hunter-gatherer ancestors relied on nuts as an easily accessible source of calorie-dense, highly nutritious food that was often available in nonsummer months.
Our genetic make-up, shaped through millions of years of evolution, determines our nutritional and activity needs. Although the human genome has remained primarily unchanged since the agricultural revolution 10,000 years ago, our diet and lifestyle have become progressively more divergent from those of our ancient ancestors. Accumulating evidence suggests that this mismatch between our modern diet and lifestyle and our Paleolithic genome is playing a substantial role in the ongoing epidemics of obesity, hypertension, diabetes, and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Until 500 generations ago, all humans consumed only wild and unprocessed food foraged and hunted from their environment. These circumstances provided a diet high in lean protein, polyunsaturated fats (especially omega-3 [ω-3] fatty acids), monounsaturated fats, fiber, vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and other beneficial phytochemicals. Historical and anthropological studies show hunter-gatherers generally to be healthy, fit, and largely free of the degenerative cardiovascular diseases common in modern societies. This review outlines the essence of our hunter-gatherer genetic legacy and suggests practical steps to realign our modern milieu with our ancient genome in an effort to improve cardiovascular health.