The Lancet
CommentaryMedical journals: evidence of bias against the diseases of poverty
A report from the WHO recently described under-representation of individuals from low-income and middle-income countries on the editorial boards of ten leading psychiatry journals.1 Shekhar Saxena and colleagues concluded that this “unsatisfactory situation” needed to be corrected, given the global importance of mental health. But this issue goes well beyond editorial boards and mental health. There is widespread systematic bias in medical journals against diseases that dominate the least-developed regions of the world. Is this an example of what some have described as the institutional racism that afflicts parts of medicine today?2
Some of the world's leading general medical journals include the Annals of Internal Medicine, BMJ, JAMA, New England Journal of Medicine, and The Lancet. These five titles lay claim to their global legitimacy for many reasons—weekly or biweekly publication, long-established histories, the credibility and power of their owners, large numbers of full-time editorial staff, membership of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors, and influential joint statements.3 Their editorial boards matter because they help to shape the personalities and policies of these journals. The composition of editorial boards sends a signal to authors and readers about a journal's interests. General medical journals follow the same patterns as their psychiatry counterparts (panel). Most board members come from nations with a high human development index.
Editorial boards of five general medical journals
Empty CellTotal number of board membersEditorial board members: country of originBoard members from journal's main country of publicationEmpty CellEmpty CellHigh HDI*Medium HDILow HDIEmpty CellAnnals17170016 (94%)JAMA†27270020 (74%)NEJM1717009 (53%)BMJ2621509 (35%)Lancet2421126 (25%)*Human Development Index (2002 figures)†JAMA also has an international advisory committee with physicians representing Eastern Europe, Latin America, China, and the Middle East.
Human Development Index (2002 figures)
JAMA also has an international advisory committee with physicians representing Eastern Europe, Latin America, China, and the Middle East.
The Annals describes itself as “the leading journal for studies in internal medicine”; JAMA as “an international peer-reviewed general medical journal”; and the New England Journal of Medicine as “one of the pre-eminent biomedical publications in the world”. The BMJ writes that it “seeks to be at the forefront of the international debate on health”; and The Lancet claims “to be a leading voice in coverage of global public-health”. The editorial boards of these five journals have a variable part to play in decision-making about research papers and editorial policy. Some may have very little influence. But the editorial boards of these journals do not seem to reflect their (indeed, our) ambitious aspirations.
The under-representation of journal content about the health needs of resource-poor peoples is even more unsettling. Obuaya surveyed these five general medical journals in 2001.4 He found that the frequency of research articles relevant to diseases of poverty was low in the sample he studied—zero for Annals, 2% for JAMA, 4% for the New England Journal of Medicine, 6% for the BMJ, and 16% for The Lancet. He concluded that “as the journals control the global distribution of biomedical news and developments they have a responsibility to ensure that they provide essential information of an adequate quality, in sufficient quantity, and at a reasonable cost”.
If the content and editorial boards of these journals do not live up to what their editors would like readers and authors to believe, what inference can one draw? Institutional racism is a highly emotive and provocative label. Many editors and readers will resist such a term. I sent an earlier draft of this commentary to the editors of the Annals, JAMA, NEJM, and BMJ, and also to past and new members of The Lancet's international advisory board for their comments. Some fiercely challenged the word “racism”. Their preferred words were elitism, bias, insularity, nationalism, or regionalism. The implication of racism, commented one, was offensive; the phrase too strident, wrote another. But “institutional racism” has a very precise meaning. According to the UK's Commission for Racial Equality, institutional racism “occurs when the policies and practices of an organisation result in different outcomes for people from different racial groups”.4 The term, if one accepts that it is appropriate for medical journals, does not mean that individual editors are racist. It does mean that the scientific, medical, and public-health priorities of the rich world are presented as the norm. We editors seek a global status for our journals, but we shut out the experiences and practices of those living in poverty by our (unconscious) neglect. One group is advantaged, while the other is marginalised. Since journals collectively embody the attitudes and behaviours of researchers and practitioners, the actions of editors reflect the state of medical research itself. Racism in health has been widely debated1, 5—but similar ethnic biases in acceptance and commissioning policies at peer-reviewed medical journals or in funding policies at grant-awarding agancies have been little discussed, although they are recognised in other news media.6
Why might there be such an unwitting insularity at medical journals? Whether owned by a commercial publisher, a society, a trade union, or a prestigious college, journals aim to be profitable. That means editors and publishers alike steer the content of their journals to readerships that will be able to afford subscriptions, advertisers who will want to buy space, and organisations that will want to purchase reprints. Editors might also have an eye on impact factor. Research or reviews that cover diseases unlikely to be encountered in the western world will not gather the citations that some editors seek.
These biases damage our democratic culture. Poverty is the most serious threat to the health of several billion people living on our planet. The way we discuss the responsibilities of the well off to those who live in poverty depends on the media—print, radio, and television—to present a balanced and accurate picture of the world and the predicaments of its peoples. For example, the lives of those living in poverty are rarely reported in most mass news media unless there is an acute humanitarian emergency. (A rare but exemplary instance of reporting the slow news of global health is the “Lives Lost” project launched recently by The Boston Globe).7 The values that influence judgments about the selection of content for medical journals (eg, randomised controlled trials of new medicines) are largely determined by priorities in science and public health—and commerce. This mix of forces is not wholly bad for medical research. Profit helps to protect editorial freedom. But if this commercial environment does seriously skew content away from what matters to those people the journal claims to serve, as it surely does at some journals, the culture of medicine is distorted, even harmed.
Medical research therefore becomes shaped by the commercial values and agenda of its own media. The result? That the range of public debate narrows. And here is the danger to fair deliberation about diseases affecting the poor. Where are the forces countering these prevailing pressures? For medical journals, they seem to be weak and unpredictable. If leading general and specialist medical journals cannot find ways to publish work that more accurately reflects the burden of disease and risk factors8 that affect large parts of the world today, the editors of those journals are failing to discharge a vital professional responsibility, one which suggests that profit has finally trumped public service.
What can be done to reverse these trends at medical journals? First, to recognise and agree that ethnic biases within our journals are a pressing problem, subverting efforts to promote equity in global health. But second, to acknowledge that simply writing about the issue is not enough. I have previously drawn attention to how editors could improve information capacity in developing countries,9 but progress has been patchy since then, including at The Lancet. A great deal depends on training and strengthening the medical and public-health research communities in developing countries. Still, editors could do more by revising their editorial boards, calling for research papers from resource-poor settings, commissioning editorials and reviews about developing-world health issues, and perhaps opening regional editorial offices. The tide may be turning. Richard Smith, editor of the BMJ, argues that his journal has recently “improved considerably” the content relevant to the developing world. And Jeff Drazen, editor of the NEJM, reports that he and his colleagues “actively solicit” material from economically disadvantaged settings. Finally, editors could use their journals to call for greater commitment to close the 10/90 gap—where 90% of research funding is channelled into diseases affecting only 10% of the world's population.10 There are small examples of progress here too. The World Heart Federation Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, for example, runs research training seminars for investigators in developing countries.
Given the often fragile research capacity in the developing world, these efforts will take time to have their effect. Yet they are an essential first step. Perhaps editors will only seriously change their current policies when readers and advertisers demand it, when agencies such as WHO and non-governmental organisations campaign hard for it, or when research originating from developing country settings is improved in both quantity and quality. Nevertheless, a radical cultural transformation is needed within the editorial offices of leading medical journals today to reverse a deeply embedded ethnic bias. The public-service remit of journals needs to be carefully defined and protected. Community responsibility is one of medicine's core values;11 medicine's global responsibilities need to be strengthened in medical journals today.


Composition of the editorial staff of major spinal journals based on geo-economic background: A survey analysis
The widespread absence of papers originating in low and middle income economies (LAMIE) across various scholarly disciplines has been widely acknowledged. One potential reason for this could be editorial biases against submissions from LAMIE. Although this bias has been observed in different academic areas, its extent in spinal research remains largely uninvestigated. This research endeavored to investigate the composition of editorial staff members (ESM) within major spinal journals and scrutinize the degree of international diversity represented among the ESM.
We pinpointed ten major spinal journals by referencing their presence in the Journal Citation Reports of 2021. Countries of the ESM affiliated with these journals were categorized according to World Bank classifications. Following this, we conducted a thorough analysis of the ESM compositions.
A total of 982 ESM from 50 countries were identified. The United States exhibited the highest representation among ESM (395, 40.22%), followed by South Korea (57, 5.80%), Switzerland (53, 5.40%). When segmented by geographical regions, North America emerged with the highest representation, constituting 43.38% of ESM at 426, trailed by Europe & Central Asia at 31.16% (306), East Asia & Pacific at 17.92% (175). The majority of ESM, amounting to 87.98%, hailed from high income economies (HIE). There was an absence of ESM representation of low income economies. The relationship regarding the quantity of ESM in each country and its population failed to demonstrate significance (p = 0.274, r = 0.281). However, a notable positive correlation emerged when exploring the connection between ESM numbers and gross domestic product (p = 0.033, r = 0.517).
Major spinal journals exhibit a notable absence of international representation within their editorial boards, predominantly comprising members from HIE. This underscores a substantial underrepresentation of ESM originating from LAMIE within the sphere of spinal investigation.
Publication and citation inequalities faced by African researchers
Results of a Global Survey of Experts to Categorize the Suitability of Interventions for Inclusion in School Health Services
If more respondents had had expertise in other areas, such as communicable diseases, injury, and violence, then related interventions may have been categorized as essential in SHSs more often. Importantly, such conditions disproportionately affect children and adolescents in low- and middle-income countries [1,3,28]. These survey limitations suggest that while the broad intervention categories and patterns are plausible and were useful in the general development of the WHO guideline on SHSs [10], caution should be taken when interpreting fine or subtle differences.
This global survey of experts assessed the suitability of different health-related interventions for inclusion in school health services (SHSs) to inform development of the World Health Organization global guideline on SHSs.
A review of 138 global World Health Organization publications identified 406 health service interventions for 5- to 19-year-old individuals. These were consolidated, pretested, and pilot-tested in a questionnaire as 86 promotion, prevention, care, or treatment interventions. A total of 1,293 experts were identified through purposive sampling of journal databases and professional networks. In July 2019, experts were invited to complete the questionnaire online in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, or Spanish. Respondents categorized each intervention as essential, highly suitable, suitable, or unsuitable in SHSs (everywhere or in certain geographic areas only). They could also suggest interventions.
Interventions categorized most often as “Essential in SHSs everywhere” (70%–80%) are related to health promotion and health education. Clinical interventions categorized most often in this way (60%–68%) are related to immunization, screening, assessment, and general care. Interventions categorized most often as “Essential in SHSs in certain geographic areas only” (27%–49%) are related to immunization, mass drug administration, and health promotion. Interventions categorized most often as “Unsuitable in SHSs anywhere” (12%–14%) are related to screening of noncommunicable conditions. There were no important regional differences. Of 439 respondents from 81 countries, 188 suggested 378 additional interventions. Question order effect and/or purposive sampling biases may have influenced both quantitative and qualitative results for different types of intervention.
Favorable responses to almost all interventions supported their World Health Organization guideline inclusion but provided little guidance for intervention prioritization.
A proposal of sociological classification of Internet use in primary health care
Analizar y clasificar las estrategias comunicativas que desarrollan los/las profesionales de atención primaria de salud de la Comunitat Valenciana ante el uso de Internet como fuente de información de salud por parte de la población usuaria, a través de las categorías analíticas de poder y control que, según Basil Bernstein, caracterizan los procesos de comunicación de los encuentros terapéuticos.
Estudio cualitativo mediante entrevistas en profundidad a profesionales de atención primaria de salud de la Comunitat Valenciana (n = 18). Para el análisis de los discursos se ha aplicado el lenguaje de descripción de la teoría de Bernstein con el objetivo de clasificar las estrategias desarrolladas por los/las profesionales y proponer una tipología.
Se aporta una tipología sociológica de estrategias utilizadas por los/las profesionales ante el uso de Internet por parte de la población usuaria, que las clasifica según la modulación de clasificación y enmarcamiento en estrategias de rechazo, estrategias de validación, estrategias de filtro y estrategias de apertura.
Las distintas estrategias que desarrollan los/las profesionales ante el uso de Internet como fuente de información tienen implicaciones distintas para las relaciones de poder y control propias del encuentro terapéutico. Las/los profesionales deben tomar consciencia de dichas implicaciones para incrementar una mayor participación de la población usuaria en los encuentros terapéuticos.
To analyze and classify the communication strategies developed by primary health care professionals in the Valencian Community (Spain), in view of the use of the Internet as a source of health information by the user population through the analytical categories of power and control which, according to Basil Bernstein, characterize the communication processes of therapeutic meetings.
Qualitative study through in-depth interviews with primary health care professionals of the Valencian Community (n = 18). The language of description of Bernstein's theory was applied to the analysis of the speeches in order to classify the strategies developed by the professionals and to propose a typology.
A sociological typology of strategies used by professionals in the face of Internet use by the user population is provided, which classifies them according to the classification and framing modulation in rejection strategies, validation strategies, filtering strategies and opening strategies.
The different strategies developed by professionals when faced with the use of the Internet as a source of information have different implications for the power and control relationships inherent to the therapeutic encounter. Professionals should be aware of these implications in order to increase the participation of the user population in therapeutic meetings.
Letter to the Editor: “Developing Countries Representation on Editorial Boards of Major Indexed Neurosurgical Journals Worldwide”
Open versus blind peer review: Is anonymity better than transparency?