The Lancet
CommentA protocol for labrador retrievers?
On Christmas Day, 2000, Navy, a golden retriever aged 18 months, began a cocktail of celecoxib, tamoxifen, and doxycycline to target blood vessels supplying a tumour on her chest. Her owner Marion Haber, a veterinary student at Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA, was acquainted with the work of angiogenesis pioneer Judah Folkman at the nearby Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School. Soon, the golden retriever became a golden guineapig. The treatment was blinded to the patient, who unknowingly polished off the regimen with her dog biscuits. 3 months later, Navy was cancer free, and the following year a healthy report was published in a US national newspaper.1 The excitement around the story led to the drug combination being renamed the Navy protocol, which remains a familiar term in veterinary oncology today.
This was not the first time that this breed of dog had been influential in cancer treatment. A popular media story in the 1980s and 1990s centred around anecdotal reports of labrador retrievers sniffing out tumours. Take Parker, for instance, a pet labrador who repeatedly sniffed what physicians had assumed to be an eczema patch on his owner's left thigh. The itchy lesion, once removed, was histologically confirmed as a basal-cell carcinoma. Happily, Parker did not show any interest in his owner's trouser leg again. This was widely reported in the media at the time and in a dog-friendly medical journal.2
Download : Download high-res image (521KB)Download : Download full-size imageRichard Lane and SimpsonCopyright © 2009 Richard Lane
Richard Lane and Simpson
Quite rightly there are seasonal warnings at this time of year that dogs are not just pets for Christmas, with dog-rescue organisations steeling themselves for the traditional increase in unwanted canines in the new year—a problem exacerbated by an increased number of unwanted pets arising from the global recession.3 Furthermore, labrador owners in particular should beware the hazards of festive food. A simple protocol should be observed. Keep the Christmas turkey well out of Rover's reach and above nose-line, and resist falling into the easy trap of passing spare Brussels sprouts and other cooked green vegetables to him—the results are always disastrous for dog and household alike. Apologies that this warning comes too late for American readers, but take note for next year's Thanksgiving holiday.
Spare a thought also for those thousands of golden retrievers, labradors, and most commonly a cross of both these breeds who spend much of their lives faithfully guiding their blind owners to the railway station, office, shops, and clinic. They, like us, need a holiday. The resident Lancet labrador will be taking a break from the bustle of London's Waterloo station and the cramped London Underground system for a couple of weeks, tucking himself up in a luxury dog bed with some old movies and classical music for company. On Christmas day, unlike Navy's cocktail, he will find in his bowl white turkey meat, a roast potato, and a little gravy in place of the dog biscuits. But the labrador protocol will be strictly enforced—definitely no Brussels sprouts.
Seasons greetings to all labrador retrievers across the world.


Hormonal and antimicrobial therapy in theriogenology practice: Currently approved drugs in the USA and possible future directions
The use of tamoxifen has also been suggested for the treatment of canine breast cancer [22]. Interestingly, the “Navy Protocol,” a combination of celecoxib, tamoxifen, and doxycycline for treatment of breast cancer in humans, has been first used in, and thus named after, the golden retriever “Navy” [23]. Similarly, tamoxifen citrate has been shown to decrease the volume of prostate in dogs with benign hypertrophy of the prostate [24].
Hormonal and antimicrobial therapies are essential to regulate and maintain healthy reproduction in domestic animals. The appropriate and legal use of these compounds is ultimately the responsibility of the veterinarian and other users, with a primary mission to directly protect and promote the health of animals, and indirectly the health of people. The appropriate use of these products is defined by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 United States of America § 301 et seq and implementing regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations. In the past, use of a drug in an animal for an unapproved use violated this Act. However, passage of the Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act 1994 legalized the extra-label use of certain animal and human drugs in veterinary practice for treating diseases. This manuscript reviews currently approved hormonal and antimicrobial drugs for use in theriogenology. Considering the ever increasing knowledge in the area of veterinary reproduction, particularly in the treatment and control of reproduction using antimicrobials and hormones, it would be beneficial to widen the therapeutic options in these categories. The potential for widening the therapeutic options is also discussed in this review, by providing a non-exhaustive but essential list of potential new drugs for use in clinical animal reproduction (theriogenology).
Dogs' olfactory diagnostics applied on human species: State of the art and clinical perspectives